Update APIM 4.0.0 documentation to support the new CI/CD story via API Controller (#5428)
wso2/docs-apim: en/docs/install-and-setup/setup/api-controller/building-jenkins-ci-cd-pipeline-apictl.md

# Building a CI/CD Pipeline for APIs Using Jenkins

In the modern digital-era, many organizations adopt digital transformation technologies to keep up with the changes. APIs are one of the basic building blocks used in a digitally-driven organization. When the number of APIs managed by the organization grows, they need to have an automated process to handle the rapid API development process. Having a proper continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) process would give an added advantage to your organization. 

> In this section, you will learn how to build an automated process using the WSO2 API Controller(CTL) with WSO2 API Manager 4.0.0 . You will see how a solution is built using version control system (Github), artifact repository(JFrog Artifactory) and CI/CD Tool (Jenkins).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you will learn how to build an automated process using the WSO2 API Controller (apictl) with WSO2 API Manager (WSO2 API-M) 4.0.0. You will see how a solution is built using a version control system (Github), artifact repository(JFrog Artifactory) and CI/CD Tool (Jenkins).
```

> In this section, you will learn how to build an automated process using the WSO2 API Controller(CTL) with WSO2 API Manager 4.0.0 . You will see how a solution is built using version control system (Github), artifact repository(JFrog Artifactory) and CI/CD Tool (Jenkins).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you will learn how to build an automated process using the APICTL with WSO2 API-M 4.0.0 . You will see how a solution is built using a version control system (Github), artifact repository (JFrog Artifactory) and CI/CD Tool (Jenkins).
```
Let's use the abbreviations apictl and WSO2 API-M from here onwards, since we already introduced those in the first paragraph. Let's change the other occurences in this page as well.

<a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/cicd-jenkins-arch.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/cicd-jenkins-arch.png" alt="" name="" width="600"></a>

## Setting up the environment

### Step 1 - Setup Jenkins

Before you begin, you need to set up the Jenkins server on a remote machine which has public access. To  use webhooks in Github and Artifactory repository to trigger Jenkins jobs you need a publicly accessible Jenkins server url. If you are trying this on a local machine, you may have to use a tool such as [socketxp](https://www.socketxp.com/) to create a tunnel.

In this section, the instructions are tested out on an ubuntu server setup on [https://cloud.google.com/compute](https://cloud.google.com/compute) . 

Log in to the server and install following.

1. Install jq  using the command given below.
  ```
  sudo apt-get install jq

  ```

> 2. Install the [apictl tool](https://github.com/wso2/product-apim-tooling/releases/tag/v4.0.0). Extract to a location henceforth referred as `CTL_HOME`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Install the [apictl tool](https://github.com/wso2/product-apim-tooling/releases/tag/v4.0.0). Extract to a location henceforth referred as `CTL_HOME`.
```
Let's not use the github URL here, since when we are doing patch releases we need to change this URL everytime. Instead shall we point to this page -> https://apim.docs.wso2.com/en/latest/install-and-setup/setup/api-controller/getting-started-with-wso2-api-controller/#download-and-initialize-the-apictl ?
We usually update this page during each patch release we do

3. Install java.

4. Setup the Jenkins server following the instructions given [here](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/installing/linux/). You can choose to install the suggested default plugins. This will install the commonly-used plugins.
    
    <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/customize-jenkins.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/customize-jenkins.png" alt="" width="500"></a>

5. Register a webhook in the JForg Artifact repository to notify changes. To capture these events and trigger a Jenkins job, install a generic-webhook-trigger plugin.

    <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/webhook-trigger-plugin.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/webhook-trigger-plugin.png" alt="" width="500"></a>

> 6. Configure API CTL as an environment variable. Go to the **Manage Jenkins** section and select **Configure System**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Configure apictl home as an environment variable. Go to the **Manage Jenkins** section and select **Configure System**. 
```
Shouldn't this be apictl home? (Also make sure to use lowercase apictl, since that is the standard way of using that term which we decided when doing 4.0.0 release)

#### Step 2.1 - Setup source repository

This section shows how to trigger a Jenkins job when a change is made to the repository. Lets use [Github webhooks](https://docs.github.com/en/developers/webhooks-and-events/webhooks) to trigger a Jenkins job. 

1. Go to the **source** repository and under the **Settings**, select **Webhooks** and add a webhook to the jenkins server.

  <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/select-webhooks.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/select-webhooks.png" alt="" width="70%"></a>

2. Use your jenkins server URL (e.g., `http://&lt;public_ip>:8080/github-webhook/`) as the URL and **Content type** as application/json.

3. Under the **Which events would you like to trigger this webhook?** section, select **Let me select individual events**, and select **pull request** and **pushes**.

  <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/jenkins-server-url.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/jenkins-server-url.png" alt="" width="70%"></a>

Source repository is now configured. 

Now let’s initialize the source repository. This will be done from the developer’s local machine.

!!! note

>     If you haven’t setup API Controller, Please set it up using [https://github.com/wso2/product-apim-tooling/releases/tag/v4.0.0](https://github.com/wso2/product-apim-tooling/releases/tag/v4.0.0) 

Reviewer: Let's not use that URL here too. Instead use https://apim.docs.wso2.com/en/4.0.0/install-and-setup/setup/api-controller/getting-started-with-wso2-api-controller/#download-and-initialize-the-apictl

Author: Done

    After saving, You should be able to access `https://<your_org>.jfrog.io/artifactory/<repo_name>/`.

    Try uploading a sample resource. An example is given below.

    ```
    $ touch resource.txt
    $ curl -u repouser:<password> -X PUT https://xxxx.jfrog.io/artifactory/myrepo/ -T resource.txt
    ```

    Access the repository URL to see the resource.

4. Configure a webhook to triggerb the Jenkins job.

    Create a webhook to trigger the Jenkins job when a new resource is uploaded to the repository. Go to **General** → **Webhooks** and create a new one.

    URL - `http://<jenkins_host>:8080/generic-webhook-trigger/invoke?token=123**`

    Add the **Event set** as **Artifact was deployed**.

      <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/set-event.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/set-event.png" alt="" width="70%"></a>
    
    Select the repository from the new window that appears.

      <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/select-repository.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/select-repository.png" alt="" width="70%"></a>

### Step 4 - Setup API-M instances.

> Download the WSO2 API Manager 4.0.0 [here](https://github.com/wso2/product-apim/releases/tag/v4.0.0) and start the instance. Set this in a separate instance as the `dev` instance. 

Reviewer: Here too. Let's use the same URL

7. Following is the content for the PetstoreAPI. Commit all the files to the git repository

    ```
    ├── PetstoreAPI
    │   ├── Definitions
    │   │   └── swagger.yaml
    │   ├── README.md
    │   ├── api.yaml
    │   ├── api_meta.yaml
    │   ├── deployment_environments.yaml
    │   └── meta.yaml

    ```

    When you commit to the source repository, the `CICD_ARTIFACT_UPLOAD` will get triggered first and upload the built component to the Artifactory. This is displayed in the console log of the Jenkins job.

      <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/console-log-jenkins.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/console-log-jenkins.png" alt="" width="70%"></a>

    Once the bundle is uploaded to the Artifactory repository, it will trigger the deployment Jenkins job. The bundle getting deployed in API-M is displayed in the logs.

      <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/apim-logs.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/apim-logs.png" alt="" width="70%"></a>

    Log in to the API Manager instance and you should see the API is created.

>       <a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/created-api.png"><img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/learn/api-controller/created-api.png" alt="" width="50%"></a>

Reviewer: In this screenshot I can see it shows "2 APIs", but actually one is there. Any idea?

Author: No idea why it is not showing. Let me test it once again and update.
